An overview of diabetes types and treatments
Last reviewed Thu 8 November 2018
By Rachel Nall RN MSN 
Reviewed by Suzanne Falck, MD, FACP
1. Types
 
2. How insulin problems develop
 
3. Exercise and diet tips
 
4. Using insulin
5. Self-monitoring tips
 
6. Outlook
 
7. Takeaway
Diabetes is a condition that impairs the body's ability to process blood glucose, otherwise known as blood sugar.
In the United States, the estimated number of people over 18 years of age with diagnosed and undiagnosed diabetes is 30.2 million. The figure represents between 27.9 and 32.7 percent of the population.
Without ongoing, careful management, diabetes can lead to a buildup of sugars in the blood, which can increase the risk of dangerous complications, including stroke and heart disease.
Different kinds of diabetes can occur, and managing the condition depends on the type. Not all forms of diabetes stem from a person being overweight or leading an inactive lifestyle. In fact, some are present from childhood.
Types

There are several types of diabetes.
Three major diabetes types can develop: Type 1, type 2, and gestational diabetes.
Type I diabetes: Also known as juvenile diabetes, this type occurs when the body fails to produce insulin. People with type I diabetes are insulin-dependent, which means they must take artificial insulin daily to stay alive.
Type 2 diabetes: Type 2 diabetes affects the way the body uses insulin. While the body still makes insulin, unlike in type I, the cells in the body do not respond to it as effectively as they once did. This is the most common type of diabetes, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, and it has strong links with obesity.
Gestational diabetes: This type occurs in women during pregnancy when the body can become less sensitive to insulin. Gestational diabetes does not occur in all women and usually resolves after giving birth.
Less common types of diabetes include monogenic diabetes and cystic fibrosis-related diabetes.
Click here to learn more about type I diabetes.
Prediabetes
Doctors refer to some people as having prediabetes or borderline diabetes when blood sugar is usually in the range of 100 to 125 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL).
Normal blood sugar levels sit between 70 and 99 mg/dL, whereas a person with diabetes will have a fasting blood sugar higher than 126 mg/dL.
The prediabetes level means that blood glucose is higher than usual but not so high as to constitute diabetes.
People with prediabetes are, however, at risk of developing type 2 diabetes, although they do not usually experience the symptoms of full diabetes.
The risk factors for prediabetes and type 2 diabetes are similar. They include:
* being overweight
* a family history of diabetes
* having a high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol level lower than 40 mg/dL or 50 mg/dL
* a history of high blood pressure
* having gestational diabetes or giving birth to a child with a birth weight of more than 9 pounds
* a history of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
* being of African-American, Native American, Latin American, or Asian-Pacific Islander descent
* being more than 45 years of age
* having a sedentary lifestyle
If a doctor identifies that a person has prediabetes, they will recommend that the individual makes healthful changes that can ideally stop the progression to type 2 diabetes. Losing weight and having a more healthful diet can often help prevent the disease.
How insulin problems develop
Doctors do not know the exact causes of type I diabetes. Type 2 diabetes, also known as insulin resistance, has clearer causes.
Insulin allows the glucose from a person's food to access the cells in their body to supply energy. Insulin resistance is usually a result of the following cycle:
* A person has genes or an environment that make it more likely that they are unable to make enough insulin to cover how much glucose they eat.
* The body tries to make extra insulin to process the excess blood glucose.
* The pancreas cannot keep up with the increased demands, and the excess blood sugar starts to circulate in the blood, causing damage.
* Over time, insulin becomes less effective at introducing glucose to cells, and blood sugar levels continue to rise.
In the case of type 2 diabetes, insulin resistance takes place gradually. This is why doctors often recommend making lifestyle changes in an attempt to slow or reverse this cycle.
Learn more about the function of insulin by clicking here.
Exercise and diet tips
If a doctor diagnoses a person with type 2 diabetes, they will often recommend making lifestyle changes to support weight loss and overall health.
A doctor may refer a person with diabetes or prediabetes to a nutritionist. A specialist can help a person with diabetes lead an active, balanced lifestyle and manage the condition.

A healthy diet can help prevent, reverse, or manage diabetes.
Steps a person can take to embrace a lifestyle with diabetes include:
* Eating a diet high in fresh, nutritious foods, including whole grains, fruits, vegetables, lean proteins, low-fat dairy, and healthy fat sources, such as nuts.
* Avoiding high-sugar foods that provide empty calories, or calories that do not have other nutritional benefits, such as sweetened sodas, fried foods, and high-sugar desserts.
* Refraining from drinking excessive amounts of alcohol or keeping intake to less than one drink a day for women or two drinks a day for men.
* Engaging in at least 30 minutes exercise a day on at least 5 days of the week, such as of walking, aerobics, riding a bike, or swimming.
* Recognizing signs of low blood sugar when exercising, including dizziness, confusion, weakness, and profuse sweating.
People can also take steps to reduce their body mass index (BMI), which can help some people with type 2 diabetes manage the condition without medication.
Slow, steady weight loss goals are more likely to help a person retain long-term benefits.
Learn how to manage and treat diabetes by clicking here.
Using insulin
People with type I diabetes and some people with type 2 diabetes may need to inject or inhale insulin to keep their blood sugar levels from becoming too high.
Various types of insulin are available, and most are grouped by how long their effect lasts. There are rapid, regular, intermediate, and long-acting insulins.
Some people will use a long-acting insulin injection to maintain consistently low blood sugar levels. Some people may use short-acting insulin or a combination of insulin types. Whatever the type, a person will usually check their blood glucose levels using a fingerstick.
This method of checking blood sugar levels involves using a special, portable machine called a glucometer. A person with type I diabetes will then use the reading of their blood sugar level to determine how much insulin they need.
Self-monitoring is the only way a person can find out their blood sugar levels. Assuming the level from any physical symptoms that occur may be dangerous unless a person suspects extremely low glucose and thinks they need a rapid dose of glucose.
The discovery of insulin was fascinating and controversial. Click here to learn more.
How much is too much?
Insulin helps people with diabetes live an active lifestyle. However, it can lead to serious side effects, especially if a person administers too much.
Excessive insulin can cause hypoglycemia, or extremely low blood sugar, and lead to nausea, sweating, and shaking.
It is essential that people measure insulin carefully and eat a consistent diet that balances blood sugar levels as much as possible.
Self-monitoring tips
Self-monitoring blood sugar levels is vital for effective diabetes management, helping to regulate meal scheduling, physical activity, and when to take medication, including insulin.
While self-monitoring blood glucose (SMBG) machines vary, they will generally include a meter and test strip for generating readings and a lancing device to prick the skin for obtaining a small quantity of blood.
What Are the Benefits?
Often, the result is more than just a drop in pain. You may find:

You can move around better.
You're more physically fit.
Your mood improves.
You don't need to take as much pain medicine.
You can go back to work.
You're more productive at work.
Are There Risks?
Most people who get back surgery have minimal, if any, complications.

CONTINUE READING BELOW
YOU MIGHT LIKE
WEBMD
Living Better With MS - Is there room for improvement?
Take this WebMD assessment and get personalized tips to help live your life with MS to the fullest.
WEBMD
Multiple Myeloma: Symptoms, Causes, Diagnosis, Treatment
Multiple myeloma is the second most common type of blood cancer after leukemia. Learn more about the symptoms, causes, diagnosis, risk factors, and treatment of multiple myeloma at
WEBMD
How Is Your MS Care Routine? Assess now.
Take this WebMD assessment and get personalized tips to help live your life with MS to the fullest.
That said, any operation has some degree of risk, including:

Reaction to anesthesia or other drugs
Bleeding
Infection
Blood clots, for instance in your legs or lungs
Heart attack
Stroke
Herniated disk
Nerve damage, which can lead to weakness, paralysis, pain, sexual dysfunction, or loss of bowel or bladder control
The odds that something could go wrong go up for people with certain health conditions. They also vary by type of surgery. Part of your surgeon's job is to identify potential problems. So talk it over before you head to the OR.

Back Surgery Pros and Cons
Each type comes with its own risks and benefits.


Spinal fusion. This is the most common surgery for chronic nonspecific back pain with degenerative changes. The doctor will join spinal bones, called vertebrae, together. This limits the motion between them and how far your nerves can stretch. But it probably won’t limit your activity. It’s rare, but the bones don’t always fuse completely. Smoking can make this complication more likely. If it happens, you may need another operation to fix it.

Laminectomy. This is the most common surgery for lumbar spinal stenosis. In this procedure, a surgeon removes parts of the bone, bone spurs, or ligaments in your back. This relieves pressure on spinal nerves and can ease pain or weakness, but the procedure can make your spine less stable. If that happens, you’ll probably need a spinal fusion as well. Doctors sometimes do the two procedures together.
